monitor/PRTG/README.md, before:

- [EXE/Script sensor for NetApp E-Series (SANtricity) v11.80 and PRTG v20-23](#exescript-sensor-for-netapp-e-series-santricity-v1180-and-prtg-v20-23)
  - [What does this script do](#what-does-this-script-do)
  - [How to use it](#how-to-use-it)
  - [Known issues and workarounds](#known-issues-and-workarounds)
  - [Metrics](#metrics)

# EXE/Script sensor for NetApp E-Series (SANtricity) v11.80 and PRTG v20-23

## What does this script do

This script makes one API call to the SANtricity API endpoint to get "analysed-system-statistics".

Then it takes most of the metrics and sends them to stdout (and PRTG, when PRTG runs it).

Some metrics I don't find useful are dropped. 

## How to use it

PRTG v20-23 still mandates PowerShell 5.1 (x86), so that's what you must have.

Copy the script to PRTG server:

![Script copied to PRTG server](/monitor/PRTG/prtg-script-on-server.png)

Create a JWT token and run the script from the CLI using your own parameters.

You can get SAN WWID from SANtricity or SNMP walk:
```raw
enterprises.789.1123.2.500.1.2.0 = STRING: "600a098000f63714000000005eaabbccc"
```

From PowerShell 5.1 (x86):

```pwsh
.\Get-ESeriesInfo.ps1 -ApiEp "192.168.1.0" `
    -SanSysId "600a098000f63714000000005e79c17c" -Token "33feq...dsA02"
```

If that works fine (JSON output shows some performance metrics), you can create this EXE/Script sensor and configure it as any other.

You may hard-code JWT into the script, or pass it from PRTG and CLI (`-Token`). 

Some other ideas can be found [here](https://scaleoutsean.github.io/2023/09/25/monitoring-netapp-eseries-with-prtg.html#security-in-shell-scripts).

## Known issues and workarounds 

- Authentication

It would be better to be able to pass username/password instead of Token, but you may edit the script on your own to do that.

Originally the script was like that, but removed username/password in favor of tokens thinking it will be simpler better for security. 

However, due to a limitation in SANtricity 11.80 - JWT tokens can't be created for the monitor account - now the approach with tokens is not more secure, but is less convenient. 

Ideally we'd like to use JWT for the monitor account and if that's not possible, then username/password for the monitor account.

- Metrics are averaged

As the API method's name says, metrics are analyzed i.e. processed on E-Series. That can be noticed when IO metrics remain stuck at 0 even after a workload has been initiated on an idle system.

You need to wait around 90-120 seconds before these statistics are updated.

As the way that analysis and processing is done is not documented, you can't really know how correct they are for the instant in which you get them. Generally they seem to flatten spikes. 

SANtricity has other API calls that can gather live statistics for several seconds, but if metrics are gathered once every 5 minute, averaged metrics are probably more accurate than one random 10 second sample from the same period. This is why I find analyzed metrics acceptable despite their not necessarily being accurate at any point in time. 

## Metrics

These metrics are currently sent to PRTG. 

- Average CPU utilization 
- Maximum CPU utilization 
- Read IOps 
- Write IOps 
- Other IOps 
- Combined IOps 
- Read throughput 
- Write throughput 
- Combined throughput 
- Read response time 
- Write response time 
- Combined response time 
- Read response time variation 
- Write response time variation 
- Combined response time variation 
- Cache hit rate 
- RAID0 IO percentage 
- RAID1 IO percentage 
- RAID5 IO percentage 
- RAID6 IO percentage 
- DDP IO percentage 
- Read hit response time 
- Write hit response time 

Few other are dropped because I didn't find them useful. Check "analysed-system-metrics" in the SANtricity API to find out more.

Commit message:

PRTG script - change unit of CPU util to percentage

monitor/PRTG/README.md, after:

- [EXE/Script sensor for NetApp E-Series (SANtricity) v11.80 and PRTG v20-23](#exescript-sensor-for-netapp-e-series-santricity-v1180-and-prtg-v20-23)
  - [What does this script do](#what-does-this-script-do)
  - [How to use it](#how-to-use-it)
  - [Known issues and workarounds](#known-issues-and-workarounds)
  - [Metrics](#metrics)

# EXE/Script sensor for NetApp E-Series (SANtricity) v11.80 and PRTG v20-23

## What does this script do

This script makes one API call to the SANtricity API endpoint to get "analysed-system-statistics".

Then it takes most of the metrics and sends them to stdout (and PRTG, when PRTG runs it).

Some metrics I don't find useful are dropped. 

## How to use it

PRTG v20-23 still mandates PowerShell 5.1 (x86), so that's what you must have.

Copy the script to PRTG server:

![Script copied to PRTG server](/monitor/PRTG/prtg-script-on-server.png)

Create a JWT token and run the script from the CLI using your own parameters.

You can get SAN WWID from SANtricity or SNMP walk, although any WWID should do since it's not required for correct functioning of the script (it's there to make such enforcement possible).

```raw
enterprises.789.1123.2.500.1.2.0 = STRING: "600a098000f63714000000005eaabbccc"
```

From PowerShell 5.1 (x86):

```pwsh
.\Get-ESeriesInfo.ps1 -ApiEp "192.168.1.0" `
    -SanSysId "600a098000f63714000000005e79c17c" -Token "33feq...dsA02"
```

If that works fine (JSON output shows some performance metrics), you can create this EXE/Script sensor and configure it as any other.

You may hard-code JWT into the script, or pass it from PRTG and CLI (`-Token`). 

Some other ideas can be found [here](https://scaleoutsean.github.io/2023/09/25/monitoring-netapp-eseries-with-prtg.html#security-in-shell-scripts).

## Known issues and workarounds 

- Authentication

It would be better to be able to pass username/password instead of Token, but you may edit the script on your own to do that.

Originally the script was like that, but removed username/password in favor of tokens thinking it will be simpler better for security. 

However, due to a limitation in SANtricity 11.80 - JWT tokens can't be created for the monitor account - now the approach with tokens is not more secure, but is less convenient. 

Ideally we'd like to use JWT for the monitor account and if that's not possible, then username/password for the monitor account.

- Metrics are averaged

As the API method's name says, metrics are analyzed i.e. processed on E-Series. That can be noticed when IO metrics remain stuck at 0 even after a workload has been initiated on an idle system.

You need to wait around 90-120 seconds before these statistics are updated.

As the way that analysis and processing is done is not documented, you can't really know how correct they are for the instant in which you get them. Generally they seem to flatten spikes. 

SANtricity has other API calls that can gather live statistics for several seconds, but if metrics are gathered once every 5 minute, averaged metrics are probably more accurate than one random 10 second sample from the same period. This is why I find analyzed metrics acceptable despite their not necessarily being accurate at any point in time. 

## Metrics

These metrics are currently sent to PRTG. 

- Average CPU utilization 
- Maximum CPU utilization 
- Read IOps 
- Write IOps 
- Other IOps 
- Combined IOps 
- Read throughput 
- Write throughput 
- Combined throughput 
- Read response time 
- Write response time 
- Combined response time 
- Read response time variation 
- Write response time variation 
- Combined response time variation 
- Cache hit rate 
- RAID0 IO percentage 
- RAID1 IO percentage 
- RAID5 IO percentage 
- RAID6 IO percentage 
- DDP IO percentage 
- Read hit response time 
- Write hit response time 

Few other are dropped because I didn't find them useful. Check "analysed-system-metrics" in the SANtricity API to find out more.
